We're now going to take a little break from our Java deep dive and practice what we've learned so far
with variables if statements are arrays and maps to create our higher or lower gain.
So it's pretty simple.
We need to type in a number to try and guess a random number between 1 and 20 that our phone has generated.
So if I start by guessing 10 then it tells me that I need to get lower so I'll get 5 higher than 5 7
lower than 7.
It must be 6.
Excellent.
And then it generates a new random number and invites the user to play again.
So pretty simple.
There is of course one big new thing that you don't have to do yet and that is to generate a random
number and as before I'm going to leave that to you to try and figure out just a quick bit of googling
should get you the answer as to how you generate a random number between 1 and 20.
There are a couple of other little quirks that you might come across as you're building this up.
But as always don't panic if you can find solutions by Google then great.
If not then just follow along with the video and I'll show you how to make it so I hope you have fun
with this app.
Time to pause the video and give it a shot.
Best of luck.
All right then here we go.
I hope that went well for you.
I'm going to start Of course by creating a new project within Andray studio going to call it higher
or lower and use all of our default settings.
So the empty activity and finish so will start by setting up the user interface which will be very very
simple and then will write the code of course as I mentioned the new bit the bit that we haven't done
before is generating a random number.
So let's take a moment while the app is launching
and let's see how we generate a random number in Java.
So that's what I would have for you could generate random number up Android as well that would probably
give you the same thing but this is quite a Java specific case.
That top result looks pretty perfect for us.
Here we go.
And this looks ideal.
So we're creating a random which we call Randhir which is a new random and then we're creating an integer
N which is taken from our random and we use the next method to generate a random number from that.
And it looks like this would generate a random number between 1 and 50.
So next int 50 in itself would generate a random number between 0 and 49.
So we have to plus 1 to get a number between 1 and 50 OK.
That makes sense we'll come back to that and grab that code when we need it for now they are up.
So let's start by setting up
our user interface.
Now I'm not going to spend a lot of time with layouts or images here we're going to focus on the code
but you're welcome to make it look a little prettier if you like.
So here we go.
I'm going to start by taking this label and I use the existing one so I change that text too.
I'm thinking of a number between 1 and 20
and then we'll bring in another X-Fi underneath that one
will say Can you guess it.
And I think I'll just add
a little bit of a margin around the can you get it and change the text size slightly.
So it's a little more obvious.
Try 15 Espey a little larger I think.
OK then we'll bring in
a text field and we're definitely expecting a number.
So let's bring that in and as usual I like my text fields to be full with great and then the final element
that we need
is a button
so cool that gets and there we go that's my user interface so I'll just set the ID for the edit text
to be guessed at it text
updates and he acts homo references.
And also add an on click method for the button which would just be guess OK.
Right that's my user interface.
I'll run my app in the background and then jump over to the main activity of Java to write.
OK OK here we go.
So we're going to create a method that we use to.
It's a public method it's not pretending anything so it's void and it's called Guess it's being called
by the button which is a view.
So it create a variable could we with a little Vi of a type view with a big V
to represent that bottom.
So as we've done before.
Rather than go straight into generating random numbers I'm going to make sure everything's connected
up right.
And first find the value of the added text and display that in a text
so it will create an edit text called guess edit text.
And we're going to need to convert this to an edit text from vine view by id and the ID is going to
be results is dot IDs dot guess at it text.
And then we're going to display that value as a toast
so it will create a new toast using toast don't make text main activity.
This is the context the thing we want to display is going to be the guess at it text don't get text
taught to string.
Lovely when you start to do things several times it starts to get what you want often it gets it right
which is great.
And then we'll leave the length as short and then we use dog show to actually show the thing.
And here we go.
So let's give it a try.
I'll just pop in a number there that I guess.
And that appears excellent.
Great.
So the app is all connected up and working as we'd like.
Time now to introduce our random number generator.
So that's copy the code
from here.
I'll pop it in after the added text.
So recreating a new random number
and we want our random number to be between 1 and 20.
So I can just change that to 20 and it should give us our random number.
However you might see that we've got a bit of a problem here.
The way this code is set up is going to generate a new random number every time the user guesses which
is not what we want it will be impossible for them to get it unless they're very lucky.
So a neat way around that is to generate a random number up when the app is launched and you hopefully
remember although we haven't used it before the uncreate method is where we can run code that will run
when the app is launched.
So if we move out random generation code
to that then the random number will be generated when the app is launched rather than when the button
is clicked which is much better.
But there is a small problem with the code in its current form and that is if we try and access this
integer up here that will work.
It doesn't know about that variable up there in the guess method.
So to get round that we can define our integer
outside of these two methods.
And this is something known as variable scope that anything defined outside a method will be available
within that method but anything defined inside a method like that and will only be available within
that method.
So if we define That's call it random number as an integer there outside the methods I can now use it
here.
And so this will now create a random number generator and then a random number and it will assign that
random number between 1 and 20 to integer random number which is available anywhere in the main activity
class.
So I can now refer to random number right there.
So well done if you managed to either figure that out or find a different solution to that particular
problem.
So now we need to test whether that number is higher or lower or equal to the random number.
To do that we're going to need to get the value of their guess and convert it to an integer.
Now again that's something we haven't done before.
So let's do a quick Google search see if we can figure out how to do that.
So again where in Java convert string to integer you may remember we use the pass double function to
convert the string to a double before.
So we're expecting something fairly similar to that and it looks like every guy we've got into yet.
Pass it exactly the same as how the double function works.
So let's see if we can make that work.
So let's create an integer which will be uses guess as an integer and then that's going to be a guess
at it text and then we're going to get the text again.
And convert it to a string and then we want to apply the method integer dot pass it to that say integer
pass it and then the string we want to convert to an integer is that great so that should give us a
guess as an integer.
Now let's start some checking as to whether their guess is greater or less than the random number.
So we'll start with I if
guessing is greater than random number.
So if that's the case we'll create a taste saying lower because that means if their guess is bigger
than the random number they need to get lower.
OK then we'll look to see if
their guess is less than the answer.
So the random number
I could do that if
it was well if you start seeing that the author predicts is not predicting as you would expect probably
means that you've forgotten something or there's a problem in your area code.
So if this is the case we'll then test higher.
And finally if it's neither greater than or less than it must be equal to.
So let's toast to say
that's right.
Now we no longer need this test taste either.
All right so let's give it a try.
We've got a few changes that we need to make
to make the game perfect.
But it should be playable in his current form.
So let's give it a try.
I'll start with a guess of 10.
I need to go lower.
So five lower three higher must be four.
Excellent.
OK.
So the game works.
Of course one big problem is that once CS's guessed at once They're going to want to guess again.
But at the moment it doesn't generate a new random number it just keeps it at that same random number.
So when they get it right let's generate a new random number which we can do in just the same way we
did before.
So we need a new round gests
copy that over.
So I ran it and then next in 20 plus one and let's give the user a message
something like That's right.
Try again just to make it clear that they can then get a new number.
So let's try that out.
If we go so I'll use my cutting in half method again.
So starting with 10 15 12 we've got it's OK.
And then if we get 12 again then it's no longer correct.
Or in the end 9.
Fantastic.
So there's only one change that I want to make to this code and this is to get rid of the three quite
chunky and very similar lines of code that we've got there.
So generally speaking you want to avoid repeating yourself in code.
So for example we wanted to change it from a toast to updating a text field for example we'd have to
update that three times which isn't great.
Not impossible with an app of this scale but if it was a bigger app then we'd want to make this more
efficient and we can do that simply by creating a function to do the toasting for us.
So for example we could do public and again voit because we're not going to be returning anything just
making a toast and I'll call it make toast and this function is going to expect a string which I'll
just call string
and then when we've got the string what the function will do.
Is create a text where the string
is the string that was passed to it.
Very very simple.
So that means I can now replace this line with the command make toast lower.
Similarly I can replace this line with make toast Haja And this line becomes like taste.
That's right.
Try again
because not only is our code more efficient than it was before we've got far less text than we had.
It's also much more easier to update if I want to change the way I display messages to users.
I only have to update this bit of code once rather than updating each bit of code separately.
So just to finally check that that works in the same way that it did before.
Let's do one more run through.
I have a guess of 10 Haja looking good.
18 was correct.
Try again and again given a new number.
Excellent.
So I hope you enjoy that.
And you managed to make a fair bit of it yourself.
We're now going to dive back into Java itself and we're going to start by looking at the great power
that we can get from working with loop's.